# Environmental Impact Statements: Public Archive Project

Northwestern University

## INTRODUCTION

### GRANT SUMMARY

Northwestern University requests \$500,000 from the Andrew W. Mellon
Foundation to transform the world\'s largest archive of U.S.
Environmental Impact Statements (EIS) into a globally accessible digital
resource. Our EIS collection is the authoritative collection to which
the EPA directs researchers. These documents record policy history by
uniquely capturing the rhetorical debates between federal agencies,
corporate interests, and the impacted communities, offering a rare
window into how environmental decisions have been defended, contested,
and reimagined over time. This ambitious project will complete the
digitization of **\[NUMBER\]** thousands of remaining documents, build a
discovery platform styled as a public exhibit, and develop AI tools that
unlock the collection\'s potential for new forms of environmental and
humanistic inquiry.

**REASON FOR THE WORK:**

**A Unique Historical Archive with Urgent Contemporary Relevance**

Environmental Impact Statements, required by the National Environmental
Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA), document the predicted ecological, social,
and economic consequences of major federal actions as well as
considering impacts of alternatives to those actions. With recent
efforts to weaken NEPA implementation, this archive can serve as a vital
benchmark for understanding how environmental decisions have been
justified, and how those justifications may shift in the future.
Northwestern\'s extensive collection began with a 1992 donation of over
20,000 EIS titles from Northwestern faculty H. Paul Friesema, a leader
in environmental research. Through systematic collection efforts, this
archive has grown to become the authoritative record of U.S.
environmental assessment, offering a rare longitudinal lens into how
environmental decisions have been made, rationalized, and contested at
the federal level.

As climate change intensifies and environmental justice rises in urgency
as a defining issue, the EIS archive represents a critical tool for
historical research into state power, environmental governance, and the
cultural narratives that have justified ecological transformation. In
particular, the community response sections within these documents stage
a complex and often overlooked debate between federal agencies, industry
lobbyists, and the communities most directly affected by proposed
environmental interventions. This archive enables scholars to compare
the rhetorical positions of these three constituencies over time, across
regions, and within varied ecological contexts, aiming to surface the
hidden voices of impacted communities as a chorus that challenges and
critiques the dominant logics of industrial development and governmental
authority.

Despite the collection\'s immense potential, limitations currently
constrain its impact. While Northwestern has successfully digitized over
**\[33,000\]** EIS documents through a partnership with Google, making
them available through HathiTrust, in-depth research using the remainder
of this collection remains accessible only through physical visits to
Northwestern\'s library. This geographical barrier significantly limits
its scholarly impact and utility for addressing urgent environmental
challenges. Limitations to access also include discovery of materials,
as limited metadata does not support searching by key criteria such as
geographic location or project type.

The proposed project directly aligns with the Mellon Foundation\'s
mission to support work that democratizes access to knowledge,
illuminates histories of inequity, and enables public scholarship
grounded in primary sources. By removing geographic and technical
barriers to accessing critical environmental records, this initiative
will foster global collaboration on environmental research and policy
development while supporting communities seeking to understand and
address environmental injustices.

**GOALS:**

**Comprehensive Digital Transformation**

***Making Distinctive Local Collections Universally Accessible***

This initiative goes beyond the simple digitization of a collection.
More generally, it marks the Northwestern Library\'s first concerted
effort to publish a distinctive local collection as a dataset for broad
public access and use. We aim to leverage our unique library holdings
and provide new opportunities for research and education by making
collections adapted a dataset interrogable in numerous ways with an
interactive website, with artificial intelligence-driven tools for
search, document and image retrieval, and for surfacing patterns across
the large dataset with maps, graphs, and other visual modes of user
engagement. It represents a new approach to collection access and use,
reframing the archive as a platform for both computational analysis and
public engagement.

The project encompasses four interconnected components designed to
maximize the collection\'s scholarly and public impact. The first phase,
already underway as a strategic priority for Northwestern University
Libraries, focuses on digitization completion, continuing
Northwestern\'s substantial previous investment in a specialized
\$150,000 scanner and established digitization workflows. There are an
estimated **\[34,727\]** individual sheets of microfiche in the
collection. This effort will digitize the remaining documents with
rigorous quality control, implement OCR processing optimized for the
technical documents, maps, and diagrams characteristic of EIS materials,
and develop comprehensive metadata schema capturing geographic,
temporal, and agency information. Crucially, this phase will preserve
oversized materials such as maps and technical drawings that are
frequently omitted in standard digitization efforts but contain
important environmental data.

***Enabling Access through a Public Web Platform***

In phase two, the project will create an exhibit-style discovery website
that transforms how users interact with this vast collection. Built on
Northwestern\'s existing Canopy platform, an innovative library-led
initiative for public exhibits and visual storytelling, this
public-facing digital interface will go far beyond a searchable
database. It will offer intuitive discovery tools for researchers at all
levels, feature curated exhibits highlighting key environmental cases
and their historical significance, and incorporate interactive timelines
and visualizations of environmental policy evolution. The platform will
also support community engagement through commenting, tagging, and
contribution features, while ensuring accessibility compliance for
diverse users.

***Unlocking Environmental Insight with AI Tools***

The project\'s most innovative component involves expanding the AI tools
Northwestern has already developed with a previous IMLS grant to create
environmental research tools that will unlock analytical possibilities
for this large collection that exceeds the reading capacity of a single
researcher. These tools will enable text mining to uncover patterns in
federal reasoning and rhetoric, industry lobbying language, and
community responses documented in EIS records, such as town hall
transcripts, written letters, and public testimony. Computer vision will
extract data from legacy maps and schematics, and geospatial analysis
will link projects to demographic and ecological impacted areas that
have not been adequately studied. Multi-modal and temporal analysis will
integrate these voices and formats over time and space, allowing
researchers to compare the rhetorical and policy positions of
government, industry, and affected communities across historical periods
and geographic regions. By enabling systematic comparison across these
rhetorical positions, the platform will allow scholars to trace the
evolution of environmental conflict as a deeply human, often regionally
specific negotiation between authority, economic pressure, and lived
experience. Our humanistic vision for AI centers on leveraging models
and agents for the public good, enhancing access, discovery, and
knowledge creation through an intuitive, chat-based interface that makes
the archive usable not just for technical scholars but for all.

***Benchmarking Environmentally Sustainable Infrastructure***

Recognizing the environmental implications of digital infrastructure,
the project incorporates environmental sustainability as a core design
principle. The team will develop a carbon-aware architecture for AI
computation, document and share best practices for environmentally
sustainable digital humanities, and produce a detailed case study
documenting the carbon costs and sustainability decisions made
throughout the project. This component will serve as a model for
environmentally responsible digital humanities practice, ensuring the
project\'s environmental benefits far outweigh its computational
footprint.

***Impact and Innovation***

This initiative promises to advance multiple fields while addressing
urgent contemporary challenges. By democratizing environmental
knowledge, the project will remove barriers that have historically
limited access to critical environmental data, fostering expanded global
collaboration on environmental research and policy development.

The project represents a significant methodological advancement in
environmental and digital humanities. The AI tools developed for this
archive will allow scholars to trace the evolution of environmental
reasoning, rhetoric, and representation across five decades of U.S.
governance. These innovations will set new standards for large-scale
rhetorical analysis of contested public discourse, with potential
applications across archival humanities, civic data research, and public
history.

Perhaps most importantly, the project embodies the public humanities
mission by making visible the historical patterns of environmental
decision-making that have shaped contemporary inequities. Researchers,
activists, and affected communities will gain access to a valuable
resource for understanding how environmental harm has been
systematically justified and imposed, particularly in marginalized
communities. The exhibit-style interface and community features will
enable new forms of collaborative scholarship and public engagement.

The project will also create a replicable global model for environmental
archives. Its metadata standards, digital infrastructure, and analytical
workflows will serve as a framework for environmental document
preservation, discovery, and analysis in other national and
international contexts.

**ACTIVITIES:**

**Multi-Stream Development Architecture**

In lieu of a conventional project timeline with stepwise milestones, our
project employs a parallel development approach with five interconnected
work streams designed to eliminate single points of failure while
enabling continuous iteration and refinement. Throughout, our philosophy
focuses on integrating librarians, faculty partners, and both
undergraduate and PhD students into project teams throughout the grant.

**Phase 1: Data Foundation Stream (Months 1-24)**

Northwestern University Libraries will provide in-kind support for the
ongoing digitization of the remaining EIS collection using our
specialized \$150,000 scanner and established workflows. The grant will
support the critical post-processing work that transforms these scans
into an AI-ready research dataset. Dan Zellner and Nicole Finzer will
lead the continuous workflow of OCR processing, quality control, and
metadata enhancement specifically optimized for both public access and
computational analysis.

Aerith Netzer (Digital Publishing Librarian) will significantly reduce
the costs of this phase by developing in-house postprocessing
optimizations using computer vision modeling rather than relying on
expensive out-of-the-box software solutions. This approach will create
custom computer vision models specifically trained on the unique
challenges of EIS documents, which include technical diagrams, oversized
maps, handwritten marginalia, and complex multi-column layouts, while
building internal capacity for ongoing optimization and refinement. This
innovation not only reduces project costs but also creates more
effective processing capabilities tailored to our specific archive.

This stream operates continuously throughout the project, with processed
documents flowing immediately into both the public platform and AI
development streams. The team will implement metadata creation that
supports both human discovery and machine learning applications,
including comprehensive geographic, temporal, and agency information.
Rather than waiting for complete digitization, this approach enables
iterative development and immediate user feedback integration. The
machine-readable dataset optimized for AI modeling delivered from this
phase establishes the foundation for all subsequent project components.

**Phase 2: Public Platform Stream (Months 1-24)**

The public-facing platform development divides into two distinct phases
reflecting different development priorities. During months 1-12, Rachel
Cole (Curator of Transportation Library), Basia Kapolka (Digital
Humanities Librarian), Mech Frazier (Geospatial Librarian), and Aerith
Netzer (Digital Publishing Librarian) will focus on building the
exhibit-style website using Northwestern\'s Canopy platform, integrating
geospatial capabilities, and developing visualization tools that make
complex environmental data accessible to diverse audiences. Rather than
creating a traditional database, this team will craft an experience that
guides users through curated environmental narratives while maintaining
the flexibility for independent exploration across multiple research
domains.

A dedicated Knight Lab studio of 18 senior students from majors across
the university will work on this platform development as a deep,
year-long project that will serve as the capstone of their senior
Northwestern careers, in a team-based senior thesis. This studio will
focus on user experience design, interface development, and
accessibility features that ensure the platform serves diverse research
communities from academic scholars to community activists. The students
will work directly with journalism and library partners to understand
how different user groups interact with environmental archives, creating
innovative solutions for discovery, visualization, and engagement. James
Lee will teach this Knight Lab studio in collaboration with Jeremy
Gilbert, ensuring that the platform development remains aligned with the
project\'s humanistic research goals and public engagement priorities.

This development work will be enhanced by recruiting a Media, Publics
and Rhetorics PhD candidate whose dissertation research will focus on
public access website design and community engagement strategies. James
Lee will serve as dissertation advisor for this student, whose embedded
research will ensure that platform development remains grounded in
rhetorical theory and public humanities principles while generating
original scholarship about digital access and environmental
communication.

Months 13-24 shift focus to intensive user engagement and testing, led
by Elizabeth Shogren and her Medill investigative journalism students
based in the Medill Washington DC Bureau. This field-testing phase will
involve real-world investigative journalism using the EIS public access
platform, community partnerships, and iterative interface refinement
based on how practitioners actually use environmental archives for
investigative reporting, advocacy, and policy analysis. This approach
ensures the platform serves both academic research and practical
applications in environmental journalism and activism, producing a
public-facing exhibit website that demonstrates new possibilities for
open access to environmental policy archives.

**Phase 3: AI Agent Stream (Months 1-24)**

This phase represents a methodological breakthrough in digital
humanities and information science applications of artificial
intelligence. Working with Han Liu (Computer Science), a leader in AI
research, our team will implement the novel context engineering and
Model Context Protocol (MCP) frameworks that have yet to be adopted at
scale in academic contexts. This collaboration enables a fundamental
shift from the massive generalist, non-specific AI models that dominate
current applications toward deep, contextually sensitive systems
designed specifically for library collections.

Context engineering is an emerging AI methodology that moves beyond the
\"prompt engineering\" approaches popular in commercial and academic
applications of AI models. Rather than trying to coax general-purpose
models like ChatGPT or Claude to understand specialized domains through
better prompts, context engineering systematically builds
domain-specific knowledge directly into the AI\'s operational framework.
For our EIS archive, this means training the system not just on a
massive corpus of environmental documents, but on the specific
rhetorical patterns, institutional relationships, legal frameworks,
geographical dimensions and historical contexts that shape how federal
agencies, corporations, and communities communicate about environmental
issues. The contextually-honed model learns that when a document
mentions \"significant impact,\" it carries different weight depending
on whether it appears in an agency assessment, industry comment, or
community response, which represents a set of distinctions that
generalist models cannot reliably make.

Model Context Protocol (MCP)**,** developed by Anthropic but not yet
widely applied in academic settings, provides the technical
infrastructure that makes context engineering scalable and sustainable.
MCP enables AI systems to connect dynamically with specialized knowledge
sources, databases, and analytical tools rather than trying to contain
all knowledge within a single large model that contains the
undifferentiated content of an entire corpus. In our implementation, MCP
will allow the AI agent to simultaneously access the EIS text corpus,
geographic databases, scientific literature about environmental impacts,
and legal precedent databases, creating responses that integrate
multiple forms of evidence in ways that general models cannot achieve.

This approach represents a paradigm shift from the current practice in
many academic fields that struggles to apply broad, shallow AI
capabilities to specialized research domains. Instead of asking a
general model to \"understand\" environmental policy through massive but
unfocused training, our system will develop deep expertise in the
specific discourses, power relationships, and knowledge systems that
define environmental governance. The AI agent will recognize that
community resistance language has evolved differently in different
regions, that industry environmental impact assessments follow specific
rhetorical formulas that vary by decade, and that federal agency
justifications for environmental harm employ historically specific
bureaucratic vocabularies.

A second dedicated Knight Lab studio of 18 senior students from majors
across the university will work on AI agent development as their
signature year-long Northwestern project, in a parallel team-based
student capstone as the studio conducted for Phase 2. This studio will
focus on developing the human-centered interfaces, visualization tools,
and user interaction patterns that make sophisticated AI capabilities
accessible to humanistic researchers, investigative journalism for
ProPublica-type projects, and members of the public. James Lee will
teach this Knight Lab studio in collaboration with Jeremy Gilbert,
ensuring that students work directly with subject matter experts and PhD
student researchers so that cutting-edge AI technology serves the
specific needs of environmental humanities inquiry rather than generic
information processing.

Additionally, a second Media, Publics and Rhetorics PhD student will be
recruited with a dissertation focus on digital humanities and
computational approaches to environmental archives. I will serve as
dissertation advisor for this student, whose research will contribute to
both technical development and scholarly analysis of how context
engineering and MCP frameworks transform humanities research
methodologies, creating new possibilities for domain-specific AI that
serves scholarly inquiry rather than generic information processing.

The technical implementation team consisting of James Lee, Han Liu
(Computer Science/Statistics), Aihan Liu (Data Scientist), and two PhD
students will develop this context-aware system while simultaneously
building MCP infrastructure that enables data flow between the dataset,
public platform, and AI agent. This architectural innovation transforms
static library collections into dynamic, interconnected data systems
that support both historical research and computational analysis. The
resulting infrastructure establishes a new model for \"collections as
data\" that other institutions can adapt for their own specialized
archives, representing a shift from broad AI applications toward deep,
contextually sophisticated systems designed specifically for humanistic
inquiry against library collections.

**Phase 4: Environmental Benchmarking Stream (Months 1-24)**

Recognizing the environmental implications of digital infrastructure,
this stream continuously assesses and documents the carbon costs and
sustainability decisions made throughout all other project phases.
Kelsey Rydland (Director of Digital Scholarship) will lead a
comprehensive monitoring framework using established environmental
assessment tools to create real-time feedback loops that inform
computational decision-making throughout the project. Environmental
benchmarking of AI to date has focused on initial model training as a
one time environmental impact, but little attention has been paid to the
continuous, cumulative process of inference that expends power and
resources every time a model is deployed for analysis. To our knowledge,
this project would represent one of the first efforts to monitor and
assess this incremental environmental cost of AI deployment over time.

The environmental monitoring approach will integrate multiple
measurement tools to capture the full scope of the project\'s carbon
footprint. Codecarbon, the widely-used open-source tool for tracking
energy consumption during AI model training and inference, will monitor
both the context engineering work in Phase 3 and the ongoing inference
requests from public platform users. This tool automatically converts
energy consumption to CO2 estimates, enabling continuous assessment of
the AI agent\'s environmental impact as users interact with the archive.

For cloud infrastructure monitoring, the team will utilize AWS Carbon
Footprint Tool to track the emissions associated with hosting, storage,
and compute resources that support the OCR pipeline, dataset management,
and AI/website operations. This cloud-based monitoring will provide
institutional-level carbon accounting that complements the
application-specific monitoring from Codecarbon.

RAPL (Running Average Power Limit)**,** Intel\'s hardware-level
processor energy monitoring interface, will enable precise measurement
of energy consumption during local development and testing phases,
particularly for the custom computer vision models that Aerith Netzer
will develop for post-processing optimization. This hardware-level
monitoring will provide granular data about the energy efficiency of
different algorithmic approaches.

Green Algorithms, the web-based computational carbon footprint
calculator, will serve as a benchmarking tool to validate our direct
measurements and provide comparative analysis against standard
computational approaches. This will help demonstrate how our specialized
context engineering and MCP framework compares environmentally to
traditional AI implementations.

This continuous monitoring approach will enable reflective
decision-making about computational efficiency, server optimization, and
sustainable practices rather than treating environmental impact as an
afterthought or nuisance. The team will document carbon-aware
computational practices, including strategies for reducing inference
energy consumption, optimizing data processing workflows, and scheduling
computationally intensive tasks during periods of renewable energy
availability.

The deliverable from this phase will be a detailed case study
documenting the environmental costs and benefits of large-scale
digitization projects, with particular attention to the carbon
implications of deep, specialized AI systems versus broad,
general-purpose models. This documentation will serve as a model for
environmentally responsible digital practice, ensuring the project\'s
environmental benefits outweigh its computational footprint while
establishing benchmarks that other institutions can use for their own
environmental archive projects.

**Phase 5: Research Test Projects (Months 13-24)**

The final twelve months integrate all previous work streams through
three interdisciplinary research initiatives led by faculty that test
and refine the platform\'s capabilities while generating environmental
research for academic impact and investigative journalism for public
audiences. These projects will serve as proving grounds of sorts that
stress test our assumptions in each of the previous four phases, while
demonstrating the potential of our project to generate new research
findings in published form.

The *Community Voice and Resistance Analysis* project, led by James Lee,
will systematically extract and analyze the language of impacted
communities, contained in letters, public comments, town hall
transcripts, to surface recurring themes of resistance, adaptation, and
environmental identity. By comparing these voices with government and
industry rhetoric, this research will reveal patterns in how
marginalized perspectives have shaped or been excluded from the
environmental policy process, demonstrating the platform\'s capacity for
large-scale rhetorical analysis and comparative study.

The *Toxic Exposure at Military Bases* investigation, led by Elizabeth
Shogren, will enable veterans, scientists, and advocates to trace
exposure to hazardous chemicals (TCE, PFAS) at federal sites, supporting
medical research into unexplained illnesses, policy reform for cleanup
standards, and personal redress through legal action. This project will
test the platform\'s ability to connect textual evidence with geographic
analysis and quantitative data extraction from technical documents,
leveraging Shogren\'s extensive experience in environmental
investigative journalism.

The *Environmental Discourse Evolution* study, led by Jeremy Gilbert,
will compare EIS information about climate and ecosystems from 2004 to
present against the rise of social media and internet discourse,
examining how environmental knowledge and contestation have transformed
across information ecosystems. This research will demonstrate the
platform\'s temporal analysis capabilities and its potential for
interdisciplinary scholarship connecting digital humanities with media
studies and environmental communication.

**Integration Architecture and Timeline Coordination**

The MCP infrastructure enables continuous integration across all work
streams, ensuring that improvements in data processing immediately
benefit both public users and AI capabilities, while user feedback from
the platform directly informs AI development priorities. This
interconnected approach eliminates the traditional bottlenecks of
sequential development, and reduces the risk of single points of failure
disrupting the entire project, while enabling the specialization that
the interdisciplinary scope of our project requires. The overlapping
timeline structure ensures that each work stream can progress according
to its own technical requirements while contributing to the overall
system architecture that will establish new standards for environmental
archive research and analysis.

**SUSTAINABILITY:**

This project serves as a strategic, signature initiative for
Northwestern University Libraries, marking our first concerted effort to
transform one of our most distinctive local collections into a dataset
for broad public access and use. It is the cornerstone of a new library
vision that reimagines collections as dynamic data, creating platforms
for both computational analysis and public engagement. Northwestern
University Libraries is deeply committed to the long-term preservation,
accessibility, and future enrichment of this vital public resource. By
establishing a new type of digital environmental archive, we aim for the
platform to attract future research grants and partnerships that will
ensure its continued growth and relevance. In brief, our project is not
a time-bound undertaking but an investment by the library, and the
University is committed to ensuring it continues to evolve and enhance
public access for years to come.

**TECHNOLOGY:**

The proposed work involves the development and integration of three core
technologies:

1. **Optimized OCR Processing:** We will move beyond standard
    digitization to utilize advanced Optical Character Recognition (OCR)
    technology specifically optimized for the complexities of historical
    government documents, which often include technical diagrams,
    handwritten notes, and oversized maps that are crucial for research
    but challenging for standard software.

2. **Public Exhibit Platform:** The public-facing website will be built
    on \"Canopy,\" Northwestern\'s innovative, in-house platform for
    creating visually rich, narrative-driven digital exhibits. This
    technology has been selected because it moves beyond a simple
    database interface, allowing us to frame the archive as a site for
    storytelling and guided discovery, making it accessible to a broader
    public audience.

3. **AI Environmental Research Agent:** The most innovative technology
    is an AI-powered agent designed for humanistic inquiry. It will
    leverage natural language processing to enable intuitive, chat-based
    searching of millions of pages. It will employ text mining models to
    identify and compare the distinct rhetorical positions of
    government, industry, and community voices across the archive.
    Finally, it will use computer vision models to extract and structure
    quantitative data from thousands of non-textual sources like legacy
    paper maps and technical drawings, unlocking information that would
    otherwise be inaccessible. This technology was selected to allow
    researchers to ask new, large-scale questions that are impossible to
    answer through manual reading alone.

**POTENTIAL CHALLENGES:**

We anticipate several potential challenges and have designed our
activities to mitigate them:

- **Technical Complexity:** The quality and format of historical
  documents vary greatly, which could pose challenges for automated OCR
  and data extraction. To address this, we are partnering with a vendor
  specializing in complex documents and have built in a rigorous quality
  control workflow led by our digitization experts. Similarly,
  developing an AI that provides nuanced, relevant results for
  humanistic inquiry is a significant challenge, which we are mitigating
  through a human-centered design process led by the Knight Lab and an
  iterative development cycle with user feedback.

- **Scale of Data:** Managing and processing a dataset of this size
  requires significant computational resources and robust data
  architecture. Our plan directly addresses this by allocating funds for
  a scalable cloud infrastructure and leveraging the expertise of our
  data scientists and curation specialists to design an efficient data
  management plan from the outset.

- **Ensuring Broad User Engagement:** A key challenge is ensuring the
  platform is truly useful for our diverse intended audience, from
  academic researchers to community activists. Our strategy addresses
  this by building the platform as an accessible \"exhibit\" rather than
  a technical database and by directly involving end-users in the design
  and testing process through pilot partnerships.

**CONCLUSION:**

In preserving and activating this archive, Northwestern University will
illuminate the environmental conscience of U.S. environmental governance
and provide essential tools for reckoning with its complex legacy. This
project represents a unique opportunity to transform how we understand
the intersection of governance, environment, and justice while creating
infrastructure for environmental research and advocacy. With Mellon
Foundation support, our initiative will help recover the oft-silenced
voices that shaped America\'s environmental legacy, and empower new
forms of public dialogue grounded in the historical record of resistance
and debate.

APPENDIX FIGURES:

![A screenshot of a computer AI-generated content may be
incorrect.](media/image1.png){width="6.5in"
height="3.6819444444444445in"}
