## SECTION

## 1 : PROJECT DESCRIPTION

- 1.01 Proposed\_Project: The River Parks Authority (hereinafter the applicant) has .proposed to construct 1ow water weir across the Arkansas River\_ The weir wculd be Iocated 100 feet south of the Midland Valley RaiIroad Bridge which has been converted into a pedestrian bridge\_ The proposed weir is Iocated in Section 13, Township 19 Range 12 East, Tulsa County, OkIahoma \_ Figure 1-1 shows the Iocation of the proposed weir.
- 1.02 The weir would be approx imately 1,400 feet in length and would be constructed of concrete gravity section keyed into bedrock. It would have an ogee shape followed by a 25-foot downstream apron to prevent erosion from a hydraulic jump which would occur within that length\_ The crest elevation for the weir would be Elevation 617.0 The lake created by the proposed weir would be approx imately 2.0 miles long with the greatest depth being 9 feet at the weir\_
- 1 03 50-foot bascule gates would be constructed at the east end of the weir and one 50-foot bascule would be constructed at the west end of the weir Each gate, shown in Figure 1-2, would be a manufactured steel section approx imately 6 feet in height by 50 feet in Iength with its Jower edge hinged along the bottom of the gate. The hinge would be attached to the concrete at the botcom of the gate opening . Hydraulic cylinders would provide the necessary force to open or close the gates In the open position each gate leaf would flat on its archorage. The gates would be operated from controls in the gate control structures shown in Figure 1-2 would be controlled automatically or manually . Access to the east gate control structure would be by mneans of a wa/kway extending from the existing pedestrian bridge. Access to the west bank control structure would be by means of a wa]kway extending from the west bank. The type, number and size of the gates were chosen for three main reasons First, this type of gate would allow for complete emptying ûf the Iake during periods of poor water quality conditions Second, bascule gates Iie flat when completely open allowing fish to move upstream during migration. Third, the gates were designed to pass enough water through the gates that the 100-year flood upstream of the weir would not be raised nore than one foot. Two Iong gate top They
- 1.04 Three waterfall structures (see Figure 1-2) are proposed at the east end of the weir would be connected to the east gate control structure by means of a short Ie 'gth of nonoverflcw section in which there would be incorporated a hydraulically\_operated sluice gate. Three separate waterfalls would be constructed\_ The elevation of the upper waterfall structure would be 9 inches Iower than the weir. Thus = in the Iower range of river flows there would be no flow over the weir itself, but flows would over the waterfalls. The center waterfall structure would be for effect and weir elevation would be 6 feet below the upper waterfall The Iower waterfal] structure would be submerged except when flows are as to prevent adequate impoundment to cause flow over the waterfall They only its